Langchain, Langraph, Langsmith. Three
names you keep seeing in every serious
AI engineering discussion right now. Not
in research papers, in production, in
systems that retrieve from real data,
call external tools, run multi-step
reasoning loops, and get monitored like
actual software. But most people who
have heard of them or even used them
have a fuzzy picture of what each one
does, why all three exist, and how they
fit together. That's what this video is
about. A groundup breakdown of the
entire stack. What each piece solves,
how they relate, and how they combine
into a coherent architecture for
building AI systems that go well beyond
a single API call. Let's get started.
When you hit an LLM through an API, the
interaction is dead simple. You send a
prompt, the model returns text. That's
the whole thing. Think about a simple
document Q&A system. A user asks a
question about an internal policy
document. Before you even call the
model, you need to find the right
document out of potentially thousands.
Then you need to construct a prompt that
includes the relevant context. The model
generates an answer. Maybe you need to
format that answer or pass it to another
step. What you have now isn't an LLM
call. It's a pipeline. You're retrieving
data, constructing prompts dynamically,
calling the model, parsing outputs, and
chaining steps together. And if you are
building all of that from scratch,
you'll end up writing the same
boilerplate over and over again. That's
the problem Langchain was built to
solve. Langchain gives you the building
blocks to structure applications around
language models rather than just
treating them as isolated API calls. So
let's walk through the key abstractions
because each one solves a specific
painoint first. Prompt templates.
Instead of hard- coding prompts as
static strings, you define reusable
templates that inject context at
runtime. Something like explain the
concept of so and so topic in simple
terms. Your application substitutes the
topic based on what the user is asking.
Simple idea, but it means your prompts
are structured, testable, and
maintainable rather than scattered
string literal across your codebase.
Second, chains. A chain is a sequence of
steps where the output of one component
becomes the input of the next. Summarize
a document, extract key insights,
generate a userfacing response. Each
step involves the model, but they are
wired together into a single cohesive
workflow. Lang chain handles the
plumbing so you don't have to. And then
there is tools. By default, an LLM can
only generate text. It can't run a
calculation. It can't check today's
stock price. It can't query your
database. Tools fix that. A tool is just
a function the model can invoke when it
decides it needs external information.
The model says, I need to run a web
search. The framework runs it, gets a
result, and passes that back into the
model's context. Now the model can
continue reasoning with fresh real world
data. This is the shift that turns a
text generator into something that acts.
Next up, rag retrieval augmented
generation. LLMs have a hard limitation.
They only know what they were trained
on. You can't retrain a model every time
your company updates its internal docs.
Rack solves this elegantly. Instead of
cramming knowledge into the model, you
store your documents in a vector
database. So when a user asks a
question, the system retrieves the most
relevant chunks using semantic
similarity search, injects them into the
prompt and the model answers based on
that context. The model doesn't need to
know everything. It just needs access to
the right information at the right time.
Now, here's a problem that doesn't show
up until you try to ship. Your lang
agent can call tools, but the moment
that agent needs to act on behalf of a
real user, read their Gmail, post to
Slack, update a Jira ticket, push a
GitHub issue, you need oath and not once
for every single provider your agent
touches. Think about what you are
actually building here. Your application
kicks off an oath flow. That flow needs
to handle three things that are all your
responsibility by default. the oath
handshake itself, storing and managing
the tokens it gets back and refreshing
those tokens before they expire mid task
and all of that produces a connected
account a live authenticated link
between one of your users and one
external provider. Then that connected
account authenticates against the actual
oath providers Gmail, Slack, Jira,
GitHub, each with its own token logic
and scopes. Now multiply this by every
provider your agent needs and every user
in your system. Your langen tools
request a token. You have to return
tokens at tool call time via an
encrypted token v so that the tokens
live outside the model's context window
as there's a huge surface area for
attacks and vulnerabilities. And this is
what our today's sponsor scale kit
offers you out of the box. Your agent
calls a tool. Scalekit handles the
authentication oath token refresh
credential isolation. It enforces the
access rules delegated identity per
agent scoping rback and executes the
tool call against whatever system you
need SAS API MCP server database and
logs every action who what when which
agent and you just focus on the agent
and business logic while this unified
gateway handles the messy complex stuff.
They in fact support 3,000 plus tools
Gmail, Slack, Jira, Salesforce, Notion,
GitHub and more. And if you need your
own oath app credentials or production
branding and higher rate limits, they
support that too. Link is in the
description. And once you have tools and
chains working, developers naturally
start pushing it further. What if
instead of a fixed pipeline, the model
could decide what to do next? That's an
agent. An agent doesn't just answer one
question. It reasons about a problem,
picks an action, executes it, observes
the result, and then decides what to do
next.
over and over until the task is
complete. The loop called the react
loop. Reasoning and acting. It looks
like this. You first analyze the task.
What do I need to do? Choose an action.
Which tool should I invoke? Execute it.
Run the tool. Get the result. Observe.
What did I learn? Is that task done?
Repeat if not. But here is where the
engineering challenge hits. These
workflows are no longer linear. They
have loops. They branch. They call
different tools depending on what they
find. They have state information that
needs to persist across multiple
reasoning steps. You're no longer
writing script. You are engineering a
dynamic stateful system. Simple chains
can't handle this cleanly, which is
exactly why langraph exist.
Langraph takes a fundamentally different
approach to structuring AI systems.
Instead of chains, it uses graphs. A
lang graph application is made up of
nodes and edges. Each node is a unit of
work. An LLM call, a tool execution, a
retrieval step, a custom function. Each
edge defines how the system moves
between nodes. And those transitions can
be conditional. Here is what that looks
like in practice. Say you are building a
research agent. It gets a question, runs
a web search, reads the result, decides
whether it has enough to answer. And if
not, it searches again with a refined
query. That's a loop. It's not straight
line. And a chain can't model it
cleanly. In langraph, that loop is
explicit. The reasoning step is a node.
The search is a node. That do I have
enough decision is an edge condition.
The system loops back or exits based on
state. Speaking of state, that's the
other key idea. Rather than passing data
manually between steps, Lang graph
maintains a shared state object the
entire graph reads from and writes to.
Each node picks up the current state,
does it work, updates it, and passes
control forward. This makes the system
auditable. You know exactly what
information each step had, what it
changed, and what triggered the next
move. But there's a problem that doesn't
surface until you actually try to ship
one of these systems. When something
goes wrong, and it will, you need to
figure out why. Was it the prompt? Did
the retrieval step pull the wrong
documents? Did the agent choose the
wrong tool? Did the model hallucinate?
In a system with multiple reasoning
steps, tool calls, and retrieval
pipelines, the failure could be
anywhere. And unlike traditional
software where failures are crashes, the
failure mode here is often a subtly
wrong answer. Langmith fills that
observability gap, Langmith records
every step. The input prompt, the models
response, which tools were called, what
they returned, the retrieved documents,
intermediate reasoning, all visualized
as a structured trace. When something
produces a wrong answer, you open the
trace and see exactly where things went
sideways. But observability isn't just
about debugging. It's also how you get
better over time. AI outputs aren't
binary. A response can be partially
correct, off topic, or subtly
misleading. Langmith lets you build
evaluation data sets and runs your
system against them automatically,
measuring accuracy, relevance, latency,
and token usage. So when you change a
prompt or tweak your retrieval logic,
you're not guessing whether it helped,
you can measure it. Same goes for prompt
experimentation. Small wording changes
can dramatically shift model behavior.
Langsmith lets you run AB comparison
across prompt variants against the same
data set. So your iteration is
systematic. And once you are live in
production, it tracks latency, error
rates, token usage, and tool invocation
patterns under real traffic. Think
neural or graphana for distributed
systems. Here is what this looks like
end to end. A user sends a request. Lang
graph determines the execution path
which steps to run in what order with
what branching logic at each node.
Langen components do the actual work.
The prompt construction, the retrieval,
the model call, the tool execution and
languid records the entire thing. Every
input, every output, every decision
point, every tool invocation, that's the
architecture. Langchain is the
vocabulary. Langraph is the control
flow. Langmith is the visibility layer.
Each one solves a distinct problem.
Together, they cover the full surface
area of building AI systems that
actually work in production. Now, none
of this means LAN chain is perfect. The
most common criticism you'll hear from
engineers, the abstractions can be too
heavy. When something breaks, you're
often debugging through multiple layers
of framework code before you even get
your actual logic. For a simple onestep
LLM call, the overhead generally isn't
worth it. Just hit the API directly.
There has also been a pain around how
fast the library evolved. Teams that
built on early versions found themselves
refactoring when the API shifted under
them. Lang graph was actually born out
of some of this frustration. Instead of
rigid chains, you get explicit graphs
where the control flow is right in front
of you and languid exist because
observability was an afterthought in the
original design. When your pipeline is a
black box, you can't improve what you
can't see. So the honest take is if you
are prototyping something small, you
probably don't need this stack. Where it
earns its complexity is multi-step
pipelines, dynamic agents, and systems
you need to evaluate and iterate on over
time. That's where these three pieces
start pulling their way together. A year
ago, building with AI meant writing
clever prompts. Today, it means
designing systems with retrieval
pipelines, reasoning loops, tool
orchestration, and observability baked
in. That shift is already happening. The
engineers building the next generation
of AI products aren't just prompt
crafting, they are architecting. And
this stack is one of the core
foundations they are building on. If you
want to go deeper on any of these
pieces, rack pipelines, agent
architectures, evaluation frameworks,
that's exactly what we cover in this
channel. Subscribe and I'll see you in
the next one.